Reproducible builds (#611)
dfinity/docs: modules/developers-guide/pages/tutorials/reproducible-builds.adoc

. Which WebAssembly (Wasm) code is being executed for a canister? 
. The canisters are normally written in a higher-level language, such as Motoko or Rust, and not directly in Wasm.
   The second question is then: is the Wasm that's running really the result of compiling the purported source code? 

The rest of the document answers these questions.
For the first question, we will see how the {IC} provides information about canister code.
To be able to answer the second question, canister authors should ensure trusted and 
https://reproducible-builds.org/docs/definition/[reproducible builds] of the Wasm code from the source.
Such builds allow anyone to follow the same steps as the canister authors and yield the exact same Wasm code,
which can then be compared to the Wasm code executing in the canister on the {IC}.

The impatient reader who is familiar with the topic of reproducible builds can skip straight to the <<repro-build-summary,summary>>.

== Finding out which canister code the {IC} is executing

{IC} does not allow you to access the Wasm code of an arbitrary canister.
This is a design decision, as developers might want to keep some code private.

> However, the {IC} does allow you to access the _cryptographic hash_ of the Wasm code of a canister.
> More concretely, it provides you the SHA-256 hash of the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the {IC} does allow you to access the SHA-256 of the Wasm code of a canister.
```

I'd prefer keeping this short and to the point

     transitive dependencies of your project that satisfy the requirements specified in your `package.json`.
     However, `npm install` will overwrite the `package-lock.json` file every time it is invoked.
     Thus, once you are ready to create the final version of your canister, run `npm install` only once.
     After that, commit `package-lock.json` to your version control system.
     Finally, when checking the build for reproducibility, use `npm ci` instead of `npm install`.

   * For Rust code, Cargo will automatically generate a `Cargo.lock` file with the fixed versions of
     your (transitive) dependencies.
     Like with `package-lock.json`, you should commit this file to your version control system once you
     are ready to produce the final version of your canister.
     Furthermore, Cargo by default ignores the locked versions of dependencies.
     Pass the `--locked` flag to the `cargo` command to ensure that the locked dependencies are used.

   * You have to allocate canister IDs in advance, as canisters refer to each other by their IDs.

.  Your own build scripts must not introduce non-determinism.

>    Obvious sources of non-determinism include randomness, timestamps, or code obfuscators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Obvious sources of non-determinism include randomness, timestamps, concurrency, or code obfuscators.
```

= Reproducible Canister Builds
:IC: Internet Computer

Thanks to its consensus protocol, the {IC} always runs canisters' code correctly.
But this doesn't mean that it's running the _correct_ code for a canister.

> In particular, if you are a canister user as opposed to the owner, you likely want to verify that the canister is running some intended code before giving it control over your ICP tokens or confidential data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if you are using a canister somebody else developed, you may want to verify that the canister is indeed running some intended code before giving it control to make important decision for you, e.g., execute a canister smart contract involving ICP.
```

Reviewer 2: At this stage, I don't want to suggest users should put confidential data on canisters.

Author: Makes sense

Verifying this requires answering two questions:

> . Which WebAssembly (WASM) code is being executed for a canister? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Which WebAssembly (Wasm) code is being executed for a canister? 
```
My impression is that Wasm is the official contraction

Author: You are correct indeed, I'll do a search/replace

. The canisters are normally written in a higher-level language, such as Motoko or Rust, and not directly in WASM.

>    The question is then: is the WASM that's running really the result of compiling the purported source code? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The second question is then: is the WASM that's running really the result of compiling the purported source code? 
```

The rest of the document answers these questions.
For the first question, we will see how the {IC} provides information about canister code.
To be able to answer the second question, canister authors should ensure trusted and 
https://reproducible-builds.org/docs/definition/[reproducible builds] of the WASM code from the source.

> Such builds allows anyone to follow the same steps as the canister authors and yield the exact same WASM code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such builds allow anyone to follow the same steps as the canister authors and yield the exact same Wasm code,
```

> which can then be compared to the code executing on the {IC}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which can then be compared to the Wasm code executing in the canister on the {IC}.
```

The impatient reader who is familiar with the topic of reproducible builds can skip straight to the <<repro-build-summary,summary>>.

> == Finding out which code the {IC} is executing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Finding out which canister code the {IC} is executing
```

{IC} does not allow you to access the WASM code of an arbitrary canister.
This is a design decision, as developers might want to keep some code private.

> However, the {IC} does allow you to access the _cryptographic hash_ of the WASM code of a canister.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the {IC} does allow you to retrieve the _sha256 cryptographic hash_ of the WASM code of a canister.
```

More concretely, it provides you the SHA-256 hash of the code.

> To obtain this hash, you must first note the ID of the {IC} canister whose code you want to check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To obtain this hash, you must first note the principal of the {IC} canister whose code you want to check.
```

> For example, assume we're interested in the code of the Internet Identity canister, whose ID is `rdmx6-jaaaa-aaaaa-aaadq-cai`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, assume we're interested in the code of the Internet Identity canister, whose principal is `rdmx6-jaaaa-aaaaa-aaadq-cai`.
```

> Then, the easiest way to access this service is using the `dfx` tool from the terminal.

Reviewer 2: You can link dfx to https://dfinity.org/developers/

Open your terminal, and run:

----
$ dfx canister --no-wallet --network ic info rdmx6-jaaaa-aaaaa-aaadq-cai
Controller: r7inp-6aaaa-aaaaa-aaabq-cai
Module hash: 0xda8d1bdd93fbf1edddeb2a423fa3c528c2e4877d39beed2277a12e60227e44d4
----

> NOTE: If you are running an older version of `dfx`, you will need to run this command from a directory that contains a valid `dfx.json` file.

Reviewer 2: My dfx is up to date and still wanted me to run it from a dfx directory.

If you don't have such a directory, you can create it using `dfx new`.

> Here, the {IC} tells us that the hash of the code of the `rdmx6-jaaaa-aaaaa-aaadq-cai` canister (which happens to be the internet identity canister) is `0xda8d1bdd93fbf1edddeb2a423fa3c528c2e4877d39beed2277a12e60227e44d4`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, the {IC} tells us that the hash of the code of the `rdmx6-jaaaa-aaaaa-aaadq-cai` canister (which happens to be the Internet Identity canister) is `0xda8d1bdd93fbf1edddeb2a423fa3c528c2e4877d39beed2277a12e60227e44d4`.
```

> CAUTION: The check above provides you the _current_ hash of the canister, but the _controllers_ of an {IC} canister may change the code at any time (e.g., to upgrade a canister). Currently, there is only way to ensure that the canister hasn't changed its code since you last checked it: the canister's controllers must be empty, preventing the code from upgrading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CAUTION: The check above provides you the _current_ hash of the canister, but the _controllers_ of an {IC} canister may change the code at any time (e.g., to upgrade a canister). However, if the list of controllers is empty, you know that the canister is immutable since nobody has the power to change the code.
```

Armed with this hash, you can next check whether it corresponds to some given source code.
This only works if the build process for the code is reproducible.

== Reproducible builds

As a canister author, there are a few things you have to provide to your users to allow them to reproduce your build:

> * The same source code that you used to create the WASM for canister.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The same source code that you used to create the Wasm module for the canister.
```

* Instructions on how to recreate your build environment.
* Instructions on how to repeat the process of building the WASM from the source code.
  Crucially, the process must be deterministic, to ensure that it results in the exact same WASM.
  It also has to be trusted, such that the user can be convinced that the WASM is a faithful translation of the source code, and not an artifact of a malicious build tool.

We next look at each of these points in more detail.

=== Providing source code

> Typically, you will version your code in `git` or some other version control system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, you will version your code in `git` or some other version control system, and your versioned code may be available in a public repository, e.g., GitHub.
```

* To ensure that specific versions of the build tools are installed, it installs them directly, rather than 
  through `apt` (the package manager of Ubuntu, the Linux distribution running inside of the container). 
  Such package managers usually don't provide a way of pinning the build tools to specific versions.

To use this `Dockerfile`, get Docker https://docs.docker.com[up and running], place the `Dockerfile` in the project directory 
of your canister, and create the Docker container by running:
----
$ docker build -t mycanister .
----

This creates a Docker container image called `mycanister`, with Node.js, Rust and `dfx` installed in it, and your canister source code
copied to `/canister` (recall that you should run this from the canister project directory).
You can then enter an interactive shell inside of your container by running:
----
docker run -it --rm mycanister
----

From here, you can experiment with the steps needed to build your canister.
Once you are confident that the steps are deterministic, you can also put them in the `Dockerfile`, 
to allow the user to automatically reproduce your build when creating the canister.

> You can see an example in the https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/397d0087a29855564c47f0fd3323f60b5b67a8fa/Dockerfile[Dockerfile of the internet identity canister].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see an example in the https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/397d0087a29855564c47f0fd3323f60b5b67a8fa/Dockerfile[Dockerfile of the Internet Identity canister].
```

   The good news is that all of these tools aim to be deterministic.
   However, they are complicated pieces of software, and ensuring determinism is non-trivial.
   Thus, non-determinism bugs can and do occur.
   For Rust, see the https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/labels/A-reproducibility[list of current potential non-determinism issues in Rust].
   Furthermore, we have observed differences between Rust code compiled to WASM under Linux and MacOS, and thus recommend pinning the build platform and its version.
   For webpack, determinism is important to ensure caching, and webpack has since version 5 introduced https://webpack.js.org/configuration/optimization/[deterministic naming of module and chunk IDs] that you should use.
   The Motoko compiler aims to be deterministic, but there are currently known issues.
   Absolute file paths might be included in the binary, and the Motoko runtime bundled in the canisters may differ between platforms (such as Linux and MacOS).
   You can work around these issues by performing your build in a Docker container, as this will fix both the platform and the file paths.
   We will try to address these issues in the future.

>    If you find further reproducibility issues with `moc`, we would like to hear about them.

Reviewer 2: Link to desired reporting of non-determinism issues?

Author: I'll add a link to https://github.com/dfinity/motoko/issues - @crusso , please yell if this is the wrong place

   
=== Testing reproducibility

> While the above guidelines should help you achieve reproducible builds, they are by no means perfect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

If reproducibility is vital for your code, you should test your builds to increase your confidence in their reproducibility.
Such testing is non-trivial: we have seen real-world examples where non-determinism in a canister build took a month to show up!
Fortunately, a tool called https://salsa.debian.org/reproducible-builds/reprotest[reprotest] can help you automate reproducibility tests.

> It tests your build by running it in two different environments that differ in characteristics such as paths, times, file order, and others,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It tests your build by running it in two different environments that differ in characteristics such as paths, time, file order, and others,
```

If the comparison doesn't find any differences, you will see an output similar to this one:

----
No differences in ./.dfx/local/canisters/*/*.wasm
27ff185372dbf51a860d6ddbe6fc9cbdd47cb41fba8c1b702bed9767cc34d66f  ./.dfx/local/canisters/Map/Map.wasm
6af1076f70407854cd6f62f23429d81f58398729f9ee5d4247ae4f93eb12770c  ./.dfx/local/canisters/Test/Test.wasm
----

Congratulations - this is a good indicator that your build is reproducible!
However, we recommend you to run the container builds under several host operating systems and compare the results.
If the comparison does find differences between the WASM code produced in two builds, it will output a diff.
You will then likely want to use the `--store-dir` flag of `reprotest` to store the outputs and the diff somewhere where you can analyze them.
If you are struggling to achieve reproducibility, consider also using https://github.com/dettrace/dettrace[DetTrace],
which is a container abstraction that tries to make arbitrary builds deterministic.

Finally, even after you achieve reproducibility for your builds, there are still other things to consider 
for the long term.

=== Long-term considerations

> As you have seen, ensuring reproducibile builds for your canisters isn't a trivial task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> It's even more demanding if you expect your canister canister code to stay around for years, and stay reproducible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reproducibility can be more demanding if you expect your canister canister code to stay around for years, and stay reproducible.
```

6af1076f70407854cd6f62f23429d81f58398729f9ee5d4247ae4f93eb12770c  ./.dfx/local/canisters/Test/Test.wasm
----

> Congratulations - this is a good indicator that your build is not affected by your evinronment!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations - this is a good indicator that your build is not affected by your environment!
```
